Candidates must write the Q.P. Code
on the title page of the answer-book.
Series : 1GEFH SET~1
Q.P. Code
Roll No.
(I) Please check that this question paper
contains 27 printed pages.
(II) Q.P. Code given on t he right hand
side of the question paper should be
written on the title page of the
answer-book by the candidate.
(III) Please check that this question paper
contains 39 questions.
(IV) Please write down the S erial
Number of the question in the
answer-book at the given place
before attempting it.
(V) 15 minute time has been allotted to
read this question paper. The
question paper  will  be  distributed
at 10.15 a.m. From 10.15 a.m. to
10.30 a.m., the candidates will
read the question paper only and
will not write any answer on the
answer-book during this period.
SCIENCE
Time allowed : 3 hours  Maximum Marks : 80
31/1/1
#
(A) 8 : 1  (B) 2 : 1
(C) 1 : 2 (D) 1 : 8
General Instructions :
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them :
(i) This question paper comprises 39 questions. All questions are compulsory.
(ii) This question paper is divided into five sections – A, B, C, D and E.
(iii) Section A  – Questions No. 1 to 20 are Multiple Choice Questions. Each
question carries 1 mark.
(iv) Section B  – Questions No. 21 to 26 are Very Short Answer type questions.
Each question carries 2 marks. Answer to these questions should be in the
range of 30 to 50 words.
(v) Section C – Questions No. 27 to 33 are Short Answer type questions. Each
question carries 3 marks. Answer to these questions should in the range of
50 to 80 words.
(vi) Section D – Questions No. 34 to 36 are Long Answer type questions. Each
question carries 5 marks. Answer to these questions should be in the range of
80 to 120 words.
(vii) Section E – Questions No. 37 to 39 are of 3 source-based/case-based units of
assessment carrying 4 marks each with sub-parts.
(viii) There is no overall choice. However, an internal choice has been provided in
some sections. Only one of the alternatives has to be attempted in such
questions.
SECTION A
Select and write the most appropriate option out of the four options given for
each of the questions no. 1 to 20. There is no negative marking for incorrect
response. 201=20
1. Electrolysis of water is a decomposition reaction. The mass ratio
(MH : M O) of hydrogen and oxygen gases liberated at the electrodes
during electrolysis of water is :
(A) 8 : 1  (B) 2 : 1
(C) 1 : 2 (D) 1 : 8
2. The products formed when Aluminium and Magnesium are burnt in the
presence of air respectively are :
(A) Al3O4 and MgO2  (B) Al2O3 and MgO
(C) Al3O4 and MgO  (D) Al2O3 and MgO2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14


D

A
C B

3. The following table shows the pH values of four solutions A, B, C and D
on a pH scale :
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
The solutions A, B, C and D respectively are of a
(A) Strong acid, weak acid, neutral, strong base
(B) Weak acid, neutral, weak base, strong base
(C) Weak acid, neutral, strong base, weak base
(D) Weak acid, neutral, strong base, strong acid
4. Consider the following reactions :
(i) Dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium hydroxide.
(ii) Magnesium oxide reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid.
(iii) Carbon dioxide reacts with sodium hydroxide.
It is found that in each case :
(A) Salt and water is formed.
(B) Neutral salts are formed.
(C) Hydrogen gas is formed.
(D) Acidic salts are formed.
5. Reaction between two elements A and B, forms a compound C. A loses
electrons and B gains electrons. Which one of the following properties
will not be shown by compound C ?
(A) It has high melting point.
(B) It is highly soluble in water.
(C) It has weak electrostatic forces of attraction between its oppositely
charged ions.
(D) It conducts electricity in its molten state or aqueous solution.


D

C B
A

6. The metals obtained from their molten chlorides by the process of
electrolytic reduction are :
(A) Gold and silver
(B) Calcium and magnesium
(C) Aluminium and silver
(D) Sodium and iron
7. The formation of magnesium oxide is correctly shown in option :
8. Secretion of less saliva in mouth will effect the conversion of :
(A) proteins into amino acids
(B) fats into fatty acids and glycerol
(C) starch into simple sugars
(D) sugars into alcohol
9. The plant hormone whose concentration stimulates the cells to grow
longer on the side of the shoot which is away from light is :
(A) Cytokinins
(B) Gibberellins
(C) Adrenaline
(D) Auxins
10. The correct/true statement(s) for a bisexual flower is/are :
(i) They possess both stamen and pistil.
(ii) They possess either stamen or pistil.
(iii) They exhibit either self-pollination or cross-pollination.
(iv) They cannot produce fruits on their own.
(A) (i) only  (B) (iv) only
(C) (i) and (iii) (D) (i) and (iv)
11. If pea plants with round and green seeds (RRyy) are crossed with pea
plants having wrinkled and yellow seeds (rrYY), the seeds developed by
the plants of F1 generation will be :
(A) 50% round and green  (B) 75% wrinkled and green
(C) 100% round and yellow  (D) 75% wrinkled and yellow
12. The breakdown of glucose has taken the following pathway :
Glucose
(a)⎯⎯⎯ →  Pyruvate + Energy
(b)⎯⎯⎯ →  Lactic acid + Energy
The sites ‘a’ and ‘b’ respectively are :
(A) Mitochondria and Oxygen deficient muscle cells
(B) Cytoplasm and Oxygen rich muscle cells
(C) Cytoplasm and Yeast cells
(D) Cytoplasm and Oxygen deficient muscle cells
13. Mirror ‘X’ is used to concentrate sunlight in solar furnace and Mirror ‘Y’
is fitted on the side of the vehicle to see the traffic behind the driver.
Which of the following statements are true for the two mirrors ?
(i) The image formed by mirror ‘X’ is real, diminished and at its focus.
(ii) The image formed by mirror ‘Y’ is virtual, diminished and erect.
(iii) The image formed by mirror ‘X’ is virtual, diminished and erect.
(iv) The image formed by mirror ‘Y’ is real, diminished and at its focus.
(A) (i) and (ii)   (B) (ii) and (iii)
(C) (iii) and (iv)   (D) (i) and (iv)
(A) 1%    (B) 10%
(C) 90% (D) 99%
14. An old pe rson is suffering from an eye defect caused by weakening of
ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the eye lens. If the defect of
vision is ‘a’ which can be corrected by lens ‘b’, then ‘a’ and ‘b’ respectively
are :
(A) hypermetropia and convex lens
(B) presbyopia and bifocal lens
(C) myopia and concave lens
(D) myopia and bifocal lens
15. Which of the following groups do not constitute a food chain ?
(i) Wolf, rabbit, grass, lion
(ii) Plankton, man, grasshopper, fish
(iii) Hawk, grass, snake, grasshopper, frog
(iv) Grass, snake, wolf, tiger
(A) (i) and (iv)   (B) (i) and (iii)
(C) (ii) and (iii)   (D) (ii) and (iv)
16. The percentage of solar energy which is not converted into food energy by
the leaves of green plants in a terrestrial ecosystem is about :
(A) 1%    (B) 10%
(C) 90% (D) 99%
For Questions number 1 7 to 20, two statements are given — one labelled as
Assertion (A) and the other labelled as Reason (R). Select the correct
answer to these questions from the codes (A), (B), (C)  and ( D) as given
below.
(A) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the
correct explanation of Assertion (A).
(B) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not
the correct explanation of Assertion (A).
(C) Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false.
(D) Assertion (A) is false, but Reason (R) is true.
17. Assertion (A) : Decomposition reactions are generally endothermic
reactions.
Reason (R) : Decomposition of organic matter into compost i s an
exothermic process.
18. Assertion (A) : A human child bears all the basic features of human
beings.
Reason (R) : It looks exactly like its parents, showing very little
variations.
19. Assertion (A) : No two magnetic field lines are found to cross each other.
Reason (R) : The compass needle cannot point towards two directions
at the point of intersection of two magnetic field lines.
20. Assertion (A) : The amount of ozone in the atmosphere began to drop
sharply in the 1980s.
Reason (R) : The oxygen atoms combine with molecular oxygen to form
ozone.
SECTION B
Questions no. 21 to 26 are Very Short Answer Type questions.
21. A student performs the following experiment in his school laboratory.
List two observations to justify that in this experiment a chemical change
has taken place.  2
22. Draw labelled diagrams to show different stages of budding in Hydra.  2
23. (a) Besides minimising the loss of blood, why is it essential to plug any
leak in a blood vessel ? Name the component of blood which helps
in this process and state how th is component perform this
function. 2
OR
(b) (i) The transport system in plants is relatively slower than in
animals. Give reasons.
(ii) State the role of phloem in the transport of materials in
plants.  2
24. An object is placed at a distance of 60 cm from a concave lens of focal
length 30 cm. Use lens formula to find the position of the image formed in
this case.    2
25. (a) A wire of resistance R is cut into three equal parts. If these three
parts are then joined in parallel, calculate the total resistance of
the combination so formed. 2
OR
(b) Define electric power. When do we say that the power consumed in
an electric circuit is 1 watt ?  2
26. ‘‘Excessive use of chemicals and pesticides in agriculture adversely effect
the environment.’’ Justify this statement.   2
SECTION C
Questions no. 27 to 33 are Short Answer Type questions.
27. (a) ‘‘Displacement reactions also play a key role in extracting metals
in the middle of the reactivity series.’’ Justify this statement with
two examples.
(b) Why can metals high up in the reactivity series not be obtained by
reduction of their oxides by carbon ?  3
28. (a) With the help of an activity, explain the conditions under which
iron articles get rusted. 3
OR
(b) (i) Name two metals which react violently with cold water. List
any three observations which a stu dent notes when these
metal are dropped in a beaker containing water.
(ii) Write a test to identify the gas evolved (if any) during the
reaction of these metals with water.  3
29. Plants have neither a nervous system nor muscles, even then they
respond to stimuli. For example, the leaves of chhui-mui (touch-me-not)
plant when touched begin to fold up and droop.
(a) How is the information communicated in ‘‘touch-me-not’’ plants ?
(b) What enables the plant cells to bring out the observable response ?
(c) Differentiate the movement mentioned above from the movement
of tendrils in a pea plant.  3
30. (a) What are chromosomes ?
(b) Explain in brief how stability of DNA content of a species is
ensured in sexually reproducing organisms ?  3
31. Draw ray diagrams to show the nature, position and relative size of the
image formed by a convex mirror when the object is placed (i) at infinity
and (ii) between infinity and pole P of the mirror.  3
32. Consider the following electric circuit :
Calculate the values of the following :  3
(a) The total resistance of the circuit
(b) The total current drawn from the source
(c) Potential difference across the parallel combination of 10  and
15  resistors
(I)
lH
HHH
– C – C – C – C
HHH


(II)
H H H
– C – C – C – C – HH
OH H H

    
33. (a) Write the relationship between resistivity and resistance of a
cylindrical conductor of length l and area of cross-section A. Hence
derive the SI unit of resistivity.
(b) Why are alloys used in electrical heating devices ?  3
SECTION D
Questions no. 34 to 36 are Long Answer Type questions.
34. (a) (i) Draw two isomeric structures of Butene (C4H8).
(ii) Name the following compounds :
(I)
lH
HHH
– C – C – C – C
HHH


(II)
H H H
– C – C – C – C – HH
OH H H

    
(iii) Write the chemical equations for the following reactions.
Mention one essential condition each for these reactions to
take place.
(I) Ethanol undergoes complete oxidation
(II) Propene undergoes hydrogenation
(III) Ethanoic acid reacts with ethanol  5
OR
(b) (i) A carbon compound X is a good solvent. On reaction with